Add tutorial for building from source using docker (#5107)
PointCloudLibrary/pcl: doc/tutorials/content/compiling_pcl_docker.rst

.. _compiling_pcl_docker:

Compiling PCL from source on Docker
------------------------------------

This tutorial explains how to build the Point Cloud Library **from source** on
Docker.

.. note::
The walkthrough of the procedure was done in Windows 10 where Ubuntu 20.04 is installed
in virtual machine. The reason is that docker can be much easier installed in linux OSs
compared to Windows

Requirements
-------------
Git installation

Open a terminal in Ubuntu (inside VirtualBox) and run the following command in order to
check if docker is already installed
.. note::
	git --version
If it is not already installed, run again in terminal the following commands
.. note::
	sudo apt install git

Docker installation.

Open a terminal in Ubuntu (inside VirtualBox) and run the following command in order to
check if docker is already installed
.. note::
	docker --version
If it is not already installed, run again in terminal the following commands
.. note::

> 	sudo apt install docker.io

Author: I added this way because curl was not installed in my machine. I will add your case since it comes from the official docker page.

	sudo snap install docker
Verify if docker is really installed by running docker --version. The containeres
sudo docker ps shows running container. Other useful command to see the docker are
.. note::
	service docker status which shows the docker status. If everything is fine it 
	active (running). You can start/stop docker if needed by running service docker start/stop

Downloading PCL source code
---------------------------
Download the pcl source code in Ubuntu (inside VirtualBox) with
  git clone https://github.com/PointCloudLibrary/pcl.git

Docker container configuration
------------------------------
Pull the docker image by running
.. note::
	sudo docker pull pointcloudlibrary/env:20.04
	
The docker image above will have OS Ubuntu 20.04. 
Other possible images options can be found under

> https://github.com/PointCloudLibrary/pcl/blob/master/.ci/azure-pipelines/azure-pipelines.yaml#L17

Reviewer: A better method would be to use docker directly:
```
$ curl -L -s 'https://registry.hub.docker.com/v2/repositories/pointcloudlibrary/env/tags/' | jq '.results | map({(."name"): .last_updated}) | add'
{
  "winx64": "2021-12-26T04:50:11.124554Z",
  "winx86": "2021-12-26T03:37:24.340362Z",
  "20.04": "2021-12-26T00:16:32.434026Z",
  "21.04": "2021-12-26T00:16:29.209056Z",
  "18.04": "2021-12-26T00:13:49.786508Z",
  "20.10": "2021-12-19T00:14:28.7217Z",
  "16.04": "2020-11-01T00:15:56.003046Z",
  "19.10": "2019-10-29T13:23:23.954075Z",
  "19.04": "2019-09-30T20:08:26.255512Z"
}
```

Do not worry if it takes enough time because all the pcl dependencies will be installed in this 
step. In other word no need to install Boost or Eigen.

Running the container with

> .. note::

Reviewer: Use code-block instead

> 	sudo docker run -v ~/Desktop/pcl:/home --rm -it pointcloudlibrary/env:20.04 bash

Reviewer: * No sudo
* Use `$PWD:/pcl` instead of '~/Desktop/pcl`, and add an instruction to go to the directory containing pcl code (cloned earlier). Using hard-coded paths is not a good practice
* Use `--user $(id -u):$(id -g)` to prevent all build files from created by root

Author: Could you please explaing more each part of command--user $(id -u):$(id -g)?

Reviewer: Essentially, any files created inside the docker will be created as if created by the user and not the root

where ~/Desktop/pcl represents the pcl source code in Ubuntu (inside VirtualBox) while 
home represents the pcl source code inside the docker container. Instead of home any other 
path can be used for example home/pcl.  Using volumes,  actions perfomred like creation of
new file in  Ubuntu (inside VirtualBox) are directly mapped to the selected path location
inside docker container. 

Building PCL
--------------
After running the container, we need to nagivate to pcl source code by simply running
cd home. Next step is to create a build folder and to that directory. This can be done
with mkdir build && cd build inside docker container. 

In case you prefer to use a specifi compiler like clang instead of gcc run
export CC=/usr/bin/clang

> export CXX=/usr/bin/clang++g

Reviewer: Typo? clang++g isn't valid

Last step is the cmake configuration which is done by running inside the build folder
.. note::
	cmake ..
Other cmake variables can be passed in this step for example cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release ..
which will change the build target to “Release”

Finally compile everything by running
.. note::
	make -j2

Installing PCL
--------------
Install the result:

> make -j2 install 

Reviewer: Do mention that the installation would happen inside docker. If we use --user above this should ideally be done with an `docker exec -it <container_name>` to get root access for just install command

Author: Could you please explaing more why this extra docker command is needed?

Reviewer: My assumptions:
* building inside a docker is purely to not have to worry about depdencies
* => dependencies should be linked as static
* build artifacts should be accessible from outside the docker (to potentially install)
* => in order to remove the artifacts, the build should be without root permissions
* install from the build folder from outside the docker should be possible
* => no root needed inside the docker

@larshg PTAL at my reasoning in case I missed/messed something

Author: @larshg: Any feedback about the comment above?

Reviewer 2: Hm, I'm not that familiar with using docker. Seems reasonable.

.. _compiling_pcl_docker:

Compiling PCL from source on Docker
===================================

> This tutorial explains how to build the Point Cloud Library **from source** on docker.

Reviewer 3: A short explanation what advantages (and disadvantages?) this has, and in which situations someone should choose this method, would be good. Maybe: does not install anything on your computer, no need to install dependencies, ...

.. note::

   The walkthrough of the procedure was done in Windows 10 host machine where Ubuntu 20.04
   was installed in virtual machine. The reason is that docker can be much easier installed

>    in linux OSs compared to Windows

Reviewer 3: I find this a bit confusing (Windows 10 is the host for a Ubuntu 20.04 virtual machine, which in turn is the host for a Ubuntu 20.04 docker container?), and it does not seem relevant for the tutorial. I would only say that the tutorial assumes that the (docker) host is Ubuntu, that other operating systems may also be used as hosts (possibly with some modifications to the commands), and (if you really want) that the docker host can itself run inside a virtual machine.

Author: As you said, Windows 10 is the host for a Ubuntu 20.04 virtual machine, which in turn is the host for a Ubuntu 20.04 docker container. Anyway, i will update it.

Requirements
-------------

> Open a terminal in Ubuntu (inside VirtualBox) and run the coresponding commands from each 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Open a terminal in Ubuntu (inside VirtualBox) and run the corresponding commands from each 
```

installation section

* Curl installation 

  Check if curl is already installed::

  $ curl --version

  If it is not already installed, run in terminal the relative command for your OS::
  `<https://www.tecmint.com/install-curl-in-linux>`_

* Git installation

  Check if git is already installed::

  $ git --version

  If it is not already installed, run in terminal the relative command for your OS::
  `<https://git-scm.com/download/linux>`_ 

* Docker installation

  Check if docker is already installed::

  $ docker --version

  If it is not already installed, follow the instructions from 
  `<https://github.com/docker/docker-install>`_ and run in terminal::

  $ curl -fsSL https://get.docker.com -o get-docker.sh
  $ sh get-docker.sh

>   Other useful command are()::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Other useful commands are()::
```

  $ docker ps 
  $ service docker status

  The first one shows the running containers while the latter shows the docker status. 
  If everything is fine it will be active (running).
  You can start/stop docker if needed by running::

  $ service docker start/stop

.. note::

>    It might need to add an extra sudo in docker commands if permission are not set properly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   It might be required to add an extra sudo in docker commands if permission are not set properly.
```

>    See part **run docker commands without sudo** on how to set them correctly so the sudo command to be not necessary.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   See part **run docker commands without sudo** on how to set them correctly so the sudo command is not required.
```

Downloading  PCL source code
----------------------------
Download the pcl source code in Ubuntu (inside VirtualBox)::

  $ git clone https://github.com/PointCloudLibrary/pcl.git

Docker container configuration
------------------------------
* To run docker commands without sudo::

  $ sudo groupadd docker
  $ sudo usermod -aG docker $USER
  $ newgrp docker

  Verify you can run docker without sudo::

  $ docker run hello-world

* Pull the docker image by running::

  $ docker pull pointcloudlibrary/env:20.04

>   Do not worry if it takes enough time because all the pcl dependencies will be installed in this 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Do not worry if it takes a long time because all the required pcl dependencies are preinstalled. 
```

>   step. In other words, there is  no need to install Boost, Eigen other dependencies manually.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  In other words, there is no need to install Boost, Eigen or other dependencies manually.
```

  The docker image above will have OS Ubuntu 20.04. Other possible available images can be found under::

  $ curl -L -s 'https://registry.hub.docker.com/v2/repositories/pointcloudlibrary/env/tags/' | jq '.results | map({(."name"): .last_updated}) | add'

  jq can be installed with a single command depending on your OS . See `<https://stedolan.github.io/jq/download/>`_ for more details

.. note::

   It is also possible to use the Dockerfile under .dev folder to set up your docker 
   image. The method of pulling the official docker image is considered more 
   stable option though.

* Run the container::

>   $ docker run --user $(id -u):$(id -g) -v $PWD/pcl:/home --rm -it pointcloudlibrary/env:20.04 bash

Reviewer 3: Could you shortly mention what the options (`--rm`, `-i`, and `-t`) do?

  where $PWD:/pcl:/home represents the pcl source code in Ubuntu (inside VirtualBox) while
  home represents the pcl source code inside the docker container.
 

>   Using volumes, actions performed  file in Ubuntu (inside VirtualBox) such as a creation of new are directly mapped

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Using volumes, actions performed on a file in Ubuntu (inside VirtualBox) such as creating new files are directly mapped
```

  to the selected path location inside docker container.

  To exit the container simply run in terminal exit

Building PCL
--------------

> After running the container, we need to nagivate to pcl source code and create a build folder to that directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After running the container, we need to navigate to pcl source code and create a build folder in that directory.
```

  $ cd home && mkdir build && cd build

In case you prefer to use a specific compiler like clang instead of gcc run::

  $ export CC=/usr/bin/clang
  $ export CXX=/usr/bin/clang++

> Last step is the cmake configuration which is done by running inside the build folder::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Last step is the cmake configuration which is done by running this inside the build folder::
```

  $ cmake ..

Other cmake variables can be passed in this step for example cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release ..
which will change the build target to “Release”. More details about cmake variables can be found
in :ref:`building_pcl`.

Finally compile everything by running::

  $ make -j2

Installing PCL
--------------
Install the result on docker::

  $ make -j2 install

To get root access for just install command::

  $ docker exec -it <container_name>

Next steps
----------

> All the steps mentioned in this tutorial should performed at least once and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All the steps mentioned in this tutorial should be performed at least once and
```

after that just running the container command and building or installing is
enough. Periodically though it is needed to pull the latest image to have

> possible updates that are incoporated in the meantime.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
possible updates that are incorporated in the meantime.
```
